# EIP-4844 Implementers' Call #19

## Meeting Details
### [Agenda](https://github.com/ethereum/pm/issues/745)
### Date: Apr 3, 2023	
### [Video Link](https://youtu.be/k6TDcU2aBDw) 
## Notes: Orignally Documented [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15EatedrJanNxBZGPVASvwq9xgbTs5UxjsDfjpM6ppSY/edit#heading=h.xdp8lfakhesv)

### Notes 

* Mofi: EIP spec update [pull 6791](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/6791) to validate excess data gas.  This makes sure the excess data gas field in headers are validated correctly.  We will get this merged upon approval.
* Client team progress. Where are we in terms of readiness, does it make sense to target a devnet launch on top of Shapella?
    * Prysm: Terence: working on implementation mostly on free the blobs which is the one thing taking the longest. We can now do local testnet between prysm & geth, can process blobs, bobs by root & blobs by range implemented & tested. Now working on initial sync from genesis. After that we are pretty close to multi-client devnet. Main blocker is that initial syncing. Target devnet in a few weeks is fairly possible.
    * Lodestar can do devnet locally w/ ethereum js.
    * Lighthouse: at the point trying to get something working locally but not quite there yet. A few features such as caching smarter, mechanic off single block/blob lookup in different scenarios, etc.  But close to have something working.  2 weeks might be when we have something running.  
    * Marius: For geth, not started looking into it but can ujse mofi/roberto fork.  Peter looking into tx pool for blobs.  Marius Working on SSZ library with casey (?) from Prysm team, which looks good now.  We have prerequisites down and should get someone on 4844 soonish. Great we have the Mofi/Roberto fork and will build on that at some point.  Tim: Does peter plan on wrwiting something up on tx pool impl?  Would be great if had documented all the solutions to the problems from the workshop.  Marius: Yes in his PR he has a brain dump of ideas in [comments in the code](https://github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/blob/8ea65c59c13fd5a8069ff074d227656549290bf3/core/txpool/blobpool/blobpool.go#L128).  
        * Do txpool things belong in spec? What about datagas field in receipt?  Marius: For txpool, probably no.  Better to have different impls for DoS prevention. Datagas should be in spec.  Lukasz: disagree with some. Overall for security & performance reasons, we have converged to have more similar rules than geth implementation.   Tim: At least if we have the code well documented, people can use that as the docs.
    * Nethermind: a couple of weeks seems feasible for next devnet, free the blobs mostly done, a few things backloggged
    * Teku: Same, we are working on things in parallel, mostly on orchestration of gossip of blobs & lookups / arrival of block, & on API signing flow.  If we can’t join the first version we’ll be ready for the second one.
    * Erigon: Roberto has a draft implementation but have only started looking at changes & understanding of them. Started merging some but not entire PR.  Roberto: Plan to get it the fork merged with upstream this week.
    * Nethermind: Alexey: we are basically ready. 
    * Besu side: FabioWe are devnet4 level so need to check for what we need to do after that. If we can target 2 weeks it depends on priority of things we are working on at the moment. Need to check with the team.
    * Mofi: The next devnet should be long-running so that client teams can join at leisure. Tim: Agree that probably makes sense. Ideally we’ll be in state where devnet is running or near running by next call.  Potentially we can get geth and erigon & eth js running off of the branches not necessarily master. But a free the blobs devnet with 2+ EL/CLs that are stable we can gradually add more clients and keep things running. Prysm / Lodestar … Can we do a week for now?  Terence: may need another week, but feel free to start without us. Might have issues with initial syncing.  Tim: Also this is easter weekend so ppl might be away. Let’s aim for early next week to try & start setting this up w/ geth, do changes to Erigon, this week, early next week try to launch it and see how it goes.  Goal: have at least an attempt to launch a devnet! Best case we have a couple clients going and others can go in, worst case we have some things identified to debug.  We’ll also obviously have the CL call before all core devs can discuss things that pop up.
* Receipt datagas field: let’s put it in the execution API.   We wanted to bring it up to the EL call / all core devs call. Tim: Once we have this PR up we can link to it from the EIP itself & mention the changes to the receipt are tried that.  Acolytec3: will try to get a PR up today or tomorrow. Will keep us posted in sharding channel of Eth R&D.
* Roberto: Do we want to implement the 2 txpool tweaks for devnet?  Tim: Yes let’s try and get prototype implementations and we can do spam tests.  
* Timeline for next fork? Tim: Biggest thing is the work for 4844, last ACD there was a strong desire not to add anything that would significantly delay the EL side.  E.g. SSZ, and some similar concerns around EOF but not clear where the consensus is going to land there. Every time something big comes around the concern is will it delay 4844.
* Alexey: what is the feedback from the L2s?  Tim: from optimistic side, Optimism has obviously invested a lot in getting  this to happen, so has Coinbase. Arbitrum also providing very positive feedback.  From ZK side we’ve checked it’s usable for them, but they may not priority it as #1 but none have objection / incompatibility, but perhaps just not top of their roadmap.  If there are any ZK L2s that have problems with it now would be the time to reach out. So far nothing critical / blocking has come up.  Terence: We are implementing it from the Arbitrum side, but worth discussing more about datagas / parameters to use, there is that research thread about it. Arbitrum labs has posted its thoughts about it: https://ethresear.ch/t/eip-4844-fee-market-analysis/15078/9  Tim: Should we discuss at upcoming ACD / CL forum?  Terence: I don’t think the L2 reps show up at these necessarily. Tim: We can pass it along then to get more feedback from client teams for next time.
* Chance blob size/count/block would change?  Tim: Would be extremely surprised if things were changed upwards from 2 blobs target max blobs 4.  If there were to be a change it might go to 1 target 2 blobs, but would be very surprised otherwise.  Roberto: One simplification might be to limit to 1 blob per tx.   Not sure if that’s important, don’t have strong opinion.  Proto: This is something that might be important for zk rollups, not so important for us.  Terence: Not so important either.
